hey everybody thanks for joining we'll
get started I see some familiar faces in
the room which is always good but thanks
for attending it's always good to be
speaking at saster I think this might be
my 10th year and our second year in a
row uh together my name is Doug pepper
I'm one of the partners at iconic growth
uh I've been investing in SAS for 23
years uh I'm amazed to say at this point
and was lucky enough to be involved with
a number of the SAS Pioneers companies
like maretto Ray canva
Ken Le air table and and several others
and I'm Christine Edmonds I'm also a
partner at iconic growth where I've been
building our analytics practice over the
past five years really our mission with
that is to answer questions that
Founders and leaders like yourselves
have with a data driven approach so
really excited to share some of that
work
today all right so just a second on
iconic growth for those of you who don't
know us iconic growth actually started
is a firm called iconic Capital which is
a multif family office helping some of
the world's most successful technology
Founders like many of you to manage
their wealth and about a decade ago we
created what Christine and I work as a
part of which is a venture capital firm
within iconic Capital that we call
iconic growth and really what that is is
a vehicle for those Founders those
families to invest in back and support
the next generation of amazing and
iconic technology
companies and this is a slide I think
we're most proud of this is the list of
the companies over the last decade that
we've been privileged and honored to
work with partner with and help support
financially and otherwise uh for the
last decade we've had 27 companies go
public in that time and just in the last
Cloud 100 list of private companies we
had 24 companies on the
list as Doug mentioned we feel really
fortunate to have partnered with these
companies but more importantly learned
alongside them and so we now have over a
decade of data from quantitative
learnings we've gathered as well as
insights that we've really amassed
through the network of leaders and so
today we're super excited because For
the First time we're going to combin the
work that we do across our entire
portfolio engagement platform so the
data driven work that we do of course
but also the work that we support when
it comes to building out executive teams
thinking about hiring thinking about
compensation and then also various
insights just through the vast network
of leaders and experts that we
have and the topic today is also one
that we have never before shared in this
format so very much looking forward to
diving into all things go to market
today from a quick methodology and
Source background we really feel that
what we're going to share today is both
representative of breadth and the best
so three key sources of the work that we
have the first is our portfolio itself
we also ran a broad external survey
earlier this year across over 200
leaders in the goto Market space to
really dive deep into some of these
nuanced topics and then finally we're
excited to share some insights from a
proprietary database that we've amassed
over the past few years looking at every
single major SAS IPO from the last eight
years what those executive teams looked
like at time of IPO and what the
backgrounds of those folks looked like
leading up to that
point as always we're very ambitious
with the amount of information we try
cover at saster and so rest assured as
always we will have these slides
available after the fact and much of
this information is also available on
our
website all right so we're going to dive
into the topic now it's one that you
probably know and have heard but is so
important always talk about and that is
the hard truth that a great product
while necessary is not at all sufficient
to building a market leading and
eventually public
company and that the goal for us is to
partner with companies and help them to
build a goto Market execution and
strategy that is every bit as good as
their product if not better my
experience over many years is that the
companies that ultimately win a market
are just as good at go to market as they
are at building great products so what
we're going to talk about in this talk
is four stages of growth early stage
early growth growth and
pre-ipo within each of those stages the
key go to market Milestones the
benchmarks and ultimately the team
building strategies that allow you to
grow effectively through these
stages the other reason we feel that go
to market is particularly important
today and coming up in almost every
board meeting is in this new era of
efficient growth sales and marketing
spend Remains the biggest proportion of
SAS company spend and so again as you
think about the growth piece but also
the efficiency piece really honing in on
is that spend being used to effectively
build that engine and drive growth is a
very important
question and on the growth side I think
as many of us have experienced the past
three and a half years have been hard
when it comes to sustained long-term
growth and we've seen that in the data
so one of the ways that we look at
health of companies and health of the
industry over time is attainment to plan
so for a company that sets their annual
budget at the beginning of the year when
it comes to the end of the year what
percent of that were they able to hit in
terms of net new bookings and to put
these numbers in perspective pre-2020 we
typically saw these fall in the 95 to
100% range so really just speaks to the
meaningful impact that we've seen again
83% in the first half of this year may
feel like renewed optimism but important
to remember that many companies started
this year with more taid plans and a
little bit more conservative
growth yeah it is tough out there uh
let's start with the early stage the
first stage 0 to 20 million ARR and this
is a obviously a crucial stage we're
going to talk a lot about go to market
uh but the reality is at this stage that
the key is product Market fit and we all
know that especially in the early days
that product Market fit is not going to
be something that you get from your
Venture Capital advisor or any go to
market benchmarks or Milestones that's
where an amazing product oriented
founder comes in truly understands a
market has the right founder market fit
as well and knows what product to build
the right features for the right ideal
customer and ultimately can build a
differentiated
product but once you have that product
Market fit this is when goto Market
strategy and execution really comes in
we looked at all the data of our
companies over a decade even the
successful ones hit this thing that we
call the growth Plateau around 15
million ARR you can see in the data and
again these are the successful companies
that made it through they hit a bit of a
growth Plateau why would that be well
some of the things that got them there
are a little bit less scalable after 15
million ARR founder selling works really
effectively at the early stages you
start to run out of juice of that around
15 million ARR and then especially with
great products there's always pull from
initial early adopters and again that
runs out and the key is to start to
build a go to market strategy that
allows you to go attack a larger
market so just a quick note those of
those of you that are familiar with our
work probably recognize the iconic
growth Enterprise 5 this is not the
focus of today but rather something that
we want to use to frame performance
across these different stages these are
five metrics that we really feel are
indicative of fundamental Health
regardless of stage and so while not
every single one of these may be
directly tied to go to market Health
they are all indirectly tied in some
form or
fashion so what do these look like from
an early stage standpoint I think the
the one number to focus on here is
year-over-year growth this is a stage
where the best-in-class companies we see
are able to double or triple their
revenue in the first few years of growth
and from a strategic standpoint on the
left-and side here we talked about
product Market fit but again as Doug
said starting to think about building
out the early stages of that team
transitioning from founder Le sales
really thinking about incentivizing
growth as you build those teams as
well so starting with a team a common
question we get is what is the
sequencing and timing of those first few
hires and before we dive in there's a
lot going on on this page but most
simply the way to think about this is
this is a fairly dumb down version of an
orc chart anything that's in a dark
color is a role that in this first stage
of 10 million and Below we see more
companies have anything in a lighter
shade is less common and so what you'll
note here is most companies will hire
their first AE before ahead of sales
this is a stage when for the most part
found Founders are still leading sales
and that that is strategic Founders are
very good at leading that sales they
need to hear the voice of the customer
they need to use it to refine their
product but they're also good at a lot
of other things and so it's super
important to use that feedback to Think
Through when is the right time to
Transition Sales to a proper head of
sales and what we found is that
typically happens around the 10 million
ARR
Mark again along with a head of sales
this is where you're going to start to
build out some of the key hires on your
customer success and your Market
marketing teams really start putting
into place the foundation of sales Ops
and demand J as
well one thing to not is this first head
of sales will likely not be the head of
sales that takes you up through IPO and
that's important because you want to be
really thoughtful about what you're
looking for in general we find that most
companies have somewhere between two and
three sales leaders between founding and
actually going public and so thinking
through who is going to be able to take
you from this early growth stage to a
growth stage is really what you want to
focus on that's not to say you can't
have a super successful leader that
evolves and scales with you and and
we'll talk through that in a second but
want to make it clear that this phase is
really oriented around getting through
that growth
phase so as Christine said you're
unlikely to have one sales leader from
the beginning to the end but you would
love for that first head of sales to be
a successful as possible and and some of
that is measured by tenure we actually
went out and looked at all the data and
the reality is that if you're sub20
let's say you're a 10 million AR company
you're doing well you're still
relatively unknown it's unlikely you're
going to get everything you want in that
first head of sales hire so you're going
to have to make some tradeoffs and the
big question is am I hiring somebody who
has previously had the title head of
sales cro somewhere else or somebody
that may not have had the top job but
they've had that quota experience in
responsibility maybe at a somewhat
larger company and we had we went out
looked at the data we looked at all the
public SAS companies and literally
looked at who did they hire as their
first head of sales and what profile
made them successful the data was
actually pretty clear if you look at the
chart on the right that is hires who
came into the experience with more than
25 times the current ARR that your
business has so if you're a 10 million
ARR you want to go look for somebody
that had 250 million of quota
responsibility on their team even if
they weren't literally the C
or the head of sales and you can see in
that case that 55% of those hires not
only were successful they made it all
the way past 100 million ARR if you hire
somebody who had less than 25 times your
current ARR in terms of their quota
responsibility
44% didn't even make it out of the early
stage they didn't even make it past 20
million so our experience in my real
world experience is to go look for that
person who has the the experience the
quota responsibility not necessarily the
title I was on the board am on the board
of a company called brace that's a
public company and way back in the day I
think they were like two or three
million AR we went out to look for our
first head of sales and we hired a guy
named Miles ker who had never had the
top job he was at buddy media Salesforce
but had the experience of managing quota
by the way he is there post IPO so it
does happen sometimes um and and also
though brought that experience but
because he wasn't like the top person
still knew what it meant to roll up his
sleeves and actually close deals and
which is obviously really important at
this early
stage so the main thing and I'm looking
over at Scott Edmonds from maretto right
now uh who helped build this like I
think that first head of sales not even
on this slide their job is to come in
and convert a company that's truly kind
of solely product oriented and turn turn
it into a sales oriented
performance-driven meat eating culture
and that's a big change that I think a a
first head of sales can really do one of
the ways that they do that is build the
first incentive Compensation Plan that
includes variable compensation for
specific goals and we went out to talk
to all of this like 260 Executives to
look at how do they do this
compensation account Executives
obviously the highest amount of variable
comp about 50% typically around new
bookings sdrs bdrs are next new meetings
New Opportunities csms also have
significant variable comp 25% around
renewals and eventually driving net
dollar
retention and again the goal here for
this first head of sales is to really
build this performance culture and we
saw 82% of those surveys 65% use
accelerators in spiffs to drive really
specific goals it could be selling more
deals at the beginning of a quarter so a
quarter Isn't So backend loaded it might
be closing customers in a certain
segment uh or long-term contracts the
idea is to just really build in that
that sort of sales performance culture
actually an anecdote from maretto now
that I reminded of it uh we hired a guy
named Bill bench uh who I think you
would agree turn that into a
sales-oriented culture and you know it's
just everything we would come to board
meetings and the whole Lobby is filled
with balloons and you're like what are
these balloons for and then of course
during the board meeting there's a Gong
ring for all the deals that are closed
and then all the AES gather this is back
when everybody was in the office and the
AE that closed the deal would pop the
balloon and out would fall an iPod or
some of their gift and it just
everything you can do to change the
culture or at least add a sales
orientation to the product orientation
that you that you have is CR critical at
the this
stage all right transitioning to the
next stage we call it the early growth
stage this is 20 million to 50 million
ARR crucial moment for the company this
is the first time companies in our
experience are really starting to build
their goto market organization for scale
so what are they doing there of course
they're hiring a lot of people and so
because of that they're segmenting their
teams along a number of Dimensions that
Christine will talk about with that
complexity they're needing to build out
their Tech stack to manage that
complexity uh and then they're building
out their management and Leadership
layer to enable and Coach their
individual
contributors one of the key words you
just heard Doug say a number of times
was scaling and team and that really is
what this phase is all about so on
average we see as companies move up
towards that 50 million ER Mark they're
doubling their team size on the sales
marketing and customer success side we
obviously have worked with a number of
companies over the past few years that
are experiencing significant headwinds
we've also worked with some that have
had many strong Tailwinds and the
question they come to us with is hey we
used to be above best-in-class
benchmarks across growth but also across
all these efficiency metrics we were
just growing and growing and
everything's remained efficient and all
of a sudden it seems like things are
pivoting is that an issue what amount of
that is normal and to be expected and
which of these Dynamics are maybe
Diagnostics on something underlying that
we need to solve and what we see is of
course as your team scales some of these
numbers will come down your quote
attainment will come down your ramp time
will go up but making sure that you're
really operationalizing these teams
getting the right leadership in place
will minimize the decrease in efficiency
and productivity as your team continues
to
grow so the first question is how do you
organize them and again this will always
come down to your go to market motion
your customer base and your strategy but
what you can see here is the maturity of
segmentation really kicks in during this
phase with most companies prioritizing
geography and size as companies continue
to scale that's where we start to see
segments like industry come into play
where really understanding your customer
in a detailed manner is important to
moving up Market increasing acvs and
having those higher touch sales Cycles
but first making sure that you have
really strong organization in place when
it comes to both your Geographic
presence and the size of your
customers so as Christine said you're
you're dramatically hiring into your go
to market team you're segmenting them
all of that leads to complexity it's
necessary complexity of course I knew
everybody would take the most pictures
on this slide um it leads to complexity
and in order to manage that uh you need
to build a Tex stack and we actually
went out and surveyed again 200
Executives these are the top three most
utilized tools tools that we got
feedback on in that survey you can see
Salesforce cuts across a number of the
different categories but there are
amazing best of read companies this is
what we look for these are not all our
investments by the way these are outside
of our portfolio many of them companies
like Clary forecasting highspot in sales
enablement uh Captivate IQ and sales
incentive management but what's really
notable at this stage is that companies
that are really successful with these
Technologies are data obsessed that's
the glue that's what pulls these systems
together and so at this stage I think
for the first time people are really
building out this sales Ops revops
function to really make the best use of
these
Technologies one of the categories you
saw on the prior slide was sales
enablement and the reason why that is
such an important category is actually
represented by the data on this slide
and that is that as you grow across
stages everything gets harder and you
can see that here with attainment
numbers going down by stage and ramp
times of your AES and your sdrs going up
and when that happens you need more
salespeople for every unit of new
revenue or new ARR which of course
increases your burn shortens your Runway
not good and so at this stage we really
see companies building out enablement to
train to onboard and to equip these
salespeople with the right content with
the right playbooks to drive a really
effective process and improve these
numbers and the reality is at board
meetings we look a lot at like
individual salesperson productivity uh
but the reality is that those
salespeople those individual
contributors are really only as good as
the managers the leaders that report to
them and so when we look at those charts
and board meeting we organize them by
the managers because some really
interesting patterns come in so enabling
hiring amazing managers at this stage is
equally important as everything else you
could see in the 20 to $50 million range
the data that we have is that typically
a manager can manage five to seven
individual contributors of course as a
company gets closer to IPO they can
scale that to 7 to
10 in addition to your managers this is
now the stage where we see most
companies start to look for ahead of
sales that can take you up through IPO
and this might feel a little early to
some of you but on average we find the
sales leader that is there at time of
IPO has been there for more or less
three years prior to that just to have
the time to build out the maturity and
sophistication in that Revenue
repeatability again this is where we
find that prior experience in terms of
the quota carrying capacity is what
really matters and while the relative
scale has decreased a little bit obvious
obviously the absolute scale has
increased so again you're looking for a
sales leader that has at least 14 times
of your ARR in Quota carrying
background this is also where you're
going to look for your first head of
marketing again one of the common
questions we get asked is do I look for
someone that is really good at The
Branding piece do I look at someone that
can really Drive demand gen and what we
found is both from a commonality
standpoint as well as a correlation with
tenure and success it's product
marketing and a lot of that again comes
down to someone that has a skill set to
really build on that messaging really
share that feedback back with your
product team and continue to hone in on
that and build out the use cases across
your customer
base okay we're getting there we're now
at the growth stage so 50 to 100 million
in ARR and this stage is really all
about building longterm efficient growth
and so we'll talk through pieces of
these but that relates to moving up
Market starting to invest more in
marketing
and of course orienting all of your
processes around a more efficient
process on the marketing side here's
where you can see the percentage of
sales of marketing really start to skew
towards marketing and again there's this
will continue to steadily increase there
will be some one-time Big Marketing
expenses associated with an IPO event
but it's also important to note that the
absolute spend across both sales and
marketing is increasing and much of that
is tied to increasing complex when it
comes to your sales Cycles moving up
Market really focused on increasing
those
acvs this is obviously focused on
companies that are for the most part
targeting mid-market to Enterprise
customers but we have consistently seen
across the data that Best in Class
companies are able to do this even when
they're focused on SMB
segments as Christine mentioned some of
our most successful companies grow by
moving up Market increasing acvs and cl
closing larger Enterprise customers but
the reality is of course those
Enterprise customers while wonderful are
more complex they're more demanding they
ask for custom implementations
onboarding and custom support and that's
why you see on this slide as companies
grow through stages the percentage of
their revenue that comes from support
and services really starts to increase
obviously the goal is not just to retain
but to grow cross sell upsell those
customers and this increase spend and
Revenue
really can help drive
that another big topic that we're all
talking about these days is efficiency
uh of course that comes into play even
more at this stage than the prior stages
where companies are looking to still
grow but really start to do more with
less and move that business model
towards an IPO business model one of the
ways we're seeing a lot of companies
today get that efficiency is by building
a Global Workforce what you can see on
this slide is some of the data that
we've gathered GED around the cost
differentials between onshore and Global
Workforce between various roles and go
to market you can see there's
significant savings that are possible
there the the reality though is like if
you don't have the right leadership the
right org structure in those locals
you're not going to see the benefits and
cost
savings okay we made it to the end preo
stage 100 million to IPO what's going on
here now you're actually hiring your IPO
ready marketing leader your last CMO
before going public companies are
continuing to build out their product
Suite expanding internationally so that
they can really tell a bigger Tam story
which is crucial when going public and
of course they're refining their model
for
IPO So speaking of that CMO leader
that's ready to take a company public
you heard from Christine this is
happening much later than that last vpf
sales and you can see from the data 30%
are highering in their CMO a year less
than a year from going public you know a
total of 54% two years to IPO and then
on the dollar side 46% are hired after
100 million ARR pretty late stage why is
that well the reason is because the CMO
at this stage has to be really
multi-dimensional of course they're
going to continue to scale go to market
and demand gen marketing activities but
they need to do that in a much more
sophisticated way that is drives the
predictability that's required of a
public company but the other piece is
that IPO is really a branding event in
many ways and you also need to bring on
a CMO that can not just do demand gen
but be that Storyteller to really
Elevate the brand of the company to a
public market ready
company another big piece of being IPO
ready of course is the repeatability and
predictability of Revenue generation and
so when we look at where revenue is
coming from there's a few different ways
where we see companies really start to
expand and diversify the makeup of that
Revenue the first is thinking about the
split between existing customer base and
new customers and what you see here is
by the time companies are ready to IPO
over 50% of their revenue is generated
by existing customers through either
upsell or cross
sell cossell obviously requires a more
diverse product suite and what you can
see along the bottom here is on average
companies at the IPO stage have three
products that said I think what we
continue to see anecdotally is it really
is that first core product that's
driving growth up through IPO and these
accessory products that are helping
bolster the use cases and really drive
more of that cross sell and upsell
efforts the other lever to further
building out the revenue of course is
international expansion and this again
needs to be a strategic decision and
question that is asked do you have
competitors in these markets do you have
existing customers in those markets with
compelling use cases that can be
references to Future customers are there
potential partners that can help you
sell in the early stages as you get your
team set up there if all of those are
the case then of course makes sense to
start expanding internationally and
again at the time of IPO we typically
see about 30% of Revenue made up from
non-north America
customers so transitioning quickly if
you've done all these things and and you
feel okay we're we're ready to start
thinking through going public the big
question that many people are asking is
when will that window reopen and this is
a chart that I'm sure all of us are
tired of seeing at this point we know
what happened with SAS multiples rising
and then dropping very quickly and for
the most part shutting down the IPO
market and so today instead of trying to
guess when that timing will come about
what we really wanted to focus on is
when it does reopen what is going to
matter when it comes to your growth your
efficiency and the go to market engine
that are powering both of
these so we actually looked at the data
again not surprisingly we looked at all
the publicly traded SAS companies and
did a regression analysis of what are
the key drivers of your valuation and
your valuation multiple and this is
actually the answer in order Revenue
growth probably not surprisingly but not
just growth itself but what is the uh
predictability of that Revenue how
effective are companies at providing
forward guidance and sticking to that
guidance net dollar retention we've
talked a lot about that but really
what's the ability to drive future
growth from your existing customer base
which is obviously a lot more efficient
and then gross margin and profitability
speaking of efficiency how effectively
what's your unit economics how
efficiently are you able to generate
that Revenue
growth and then of course the double
clicking on the age-old question of
what's more important for me in terms of
my value valuation is it Revenue growth
or is it efficiency and this chart seeks
to answer that question that the colors
are different okay so the blue uh the
blue line is revenue growth and how it's
correlated with valuation the darker
line is Rule of 40 which is a common
measure of efficiency whichever line is
on top is the one at that time that the
market is stressing more in terms of how
they value you what you can see through
kind of most of 22 last year was that
efficiency went to the top that's how
companies were valued and of course now
look at the very last point on the far
right Q2 2023 it's flipped again and on
top Revenue growth and I think that
tells us what we already knew that
ultimately in the businesses that most
of us are trying to invest in and build
in this room Revenue growth is Paramount
efficiency doesn't go away it's going to
be important but without real Revenue
growth mark market share gain and
ultimately leadership in a market we
don't get the kind of valuation that we
want so we'll flip over to Q&A in a
second and welcome anyone to come up to
use the mics before we do that just
wanted to end with a few key key
takeaways and then we'll we'll share a
few resources as well yeah well we threw
a lot of data at you and um you know
hopefully you found a lot of it
insightful and and maybe um helpful in
terms of how you're thinking of building
your businesses if you're Founders this
just summarizes some of those milestones
and decisions that we already talked
about but I wanted to just share you
know one anecdote that I have from being
on boards for 23 years and ultimately to
me it does come down to the team
building assembling optimizing an
amazing team that can go to market and
win and I think it is not just the most
important job of a founder or executive
team or CEO I think it's the hardest job
and the reason it's so hard is it's the
same thing as product just like product
team is never done it's constantly
evolving and the hard part is that
throughout the journey Founders CEOs are
having to switch people out who've done
nothing wrong they're actually executing
but they just aren't ready for that next
stage of growth and so while it's hard
it's also really inspiring to watch a
leader a CEO a Founder to make those
changes proactively build an incredible
team an incredible culture and through
that a great goto Market effort and
ultimately a company that's successful
and and may be a public company one
day so also wanted to mention that last
week we just published our latest growth
and efficiency report which covers these
five metrics in a lot more detail as
well as a number of other of drivers you
can find all of that on our website
iconic.com
insights along with a number of other
resources so again today we really tried
to pull together a cohesive story but
that's comprised of probably five to 10
different very detailed studies and all
of that is also available on our
website with that thank you we're always
so excited to share this type of work at
saster and again welcome anyone to come
up now for
questions